.. _algorithms:

Nash equilibria algorithms
==========================

The table below summarizes the available PyGambit functions and corresponding Gambit CLI commandsto algorithms for computing Nash equilibria.
Scroll down for detailed descriptions of each algorithm.

================  ===========================================================================   ========================================  ==========================================
Algorithm         Description                                                                   PyGambit function                         CLI command
================  ===========================================================================   ========================================  ==========================================
:ref:`enumpure`   Enumerate pure-strategy equilibria of a game                                  :py:func:`pygambit.nash.enumpure_solve`   :ref:`gambit-enumpure <gambit-enumpure>`
:ref:`enummixed`  Enumerate equilibria in a two-player game                                     :py:func:`pygambit.nash.enummixed_solve`  :ref:`gambit-enummixed <gambit-enummixed>`
:ref:`enumpoly`   Compute equilibria of a game using polynomial systems of equations            :py:func:`pygambit.nash.enumpoly_solve`   :ref:`gambit-enumpoly <gambit-enumpoly>`
:ref:`lp`         Compute equilibria in a two-player constant-sum game via linear programming   :py:func:`pygambit.nash.lp_solve`         :ref:`gambit-lp <gambit-lp>`
:ref:`lcp`        Compute equilibria in a two-player game via linear complementarity            :py:func:`pygambit.nash.lcp_solve`        :ref:`gambit-lcp <gambit-lcp>`
:ref:`liap`       Compute Nash equilibria using function minimization                           :py:func:`pygambit.nash.liap_solve`       :ref:`gambit-liap <gambit-liap>`
:ref:`logit`      Compute quantal response equilbria                                            :py:func:`pygambit.nash.logit_solve`      :ref:`gambit-logit <gambit-logit>`
:ref:`simpdiv`    Compute equilibria via simplicial subdivision                                 :py:func:`pygambit.nash.simpdiv_solve`    :ref:`gambit-simpdiv <gambit-simpdiv>`
:ref:`ipa`        Compute Nash equilibria using iterated polymatrix approximation               :py:func:`pygambit.nash.ipa_solve`        :ref:`gambit-ipa <gambit-ipa>`
:ref:`gnm`        Compute Nash equilibria using a global Newton method                          :py:func:`pygambit.nash.gnm_solve`        :ref:`gambit-gnm <gambit-gnm>`
================  ===========================================================================   ========================================  ==========================================

.. _enumpure:

enumpure
--------

Reads a game on standard input and searches for pure-strategy Nash equilibria.

For a strategic-form game, the algorithm systematically enumerates all pure strategy profiles and verifies,
for each profile, that no unilateral deviation by any player can yield a higher payoff. In the case of
extensive-form games, pure-strategy agent Nash equilibria can be determined in an analogous manner:
the algorithm ensures that no player can improve their payoff through a unilateral deviation at any information set.

.. _enummixed:

enummixed
---------

Reads a two-player game on standard input and computes Nash equilibria using extreme point enumeration.

In a two-player strategic game, the set of Nash equilibria can be expressed as the union of convex sets.
This program generates all the extreme points of those convex sets. (Mangasarian [Man64]_)
This is a superset of the points generated by the path-following procedure of Lemke and Howson (see :ref:`lcp`).
It was shown by Shapley [Sha74]_ that there are equilibria not accessible via the method in :ref:`lcp`, whereas the output of
:program:`enummixed` is guaranteed to return all the extreme points.

The algorithm begins by rescaling payoffs so that they are non-negative. It then constructs two polyhedra:

.. math::
    P_1 = \{x\geq 0\,|\,A_1x\leq 1\} \\
    P_2 = \{y\geq 0\,|\,A_2y\leq 1\}

where :math:`A_1` and :math:`A_2` denote the payoff matrices for the respective players. Next, a bipartite graph is
formed between the vertices of :math:`P_1` and :math:`P_2`.
An edge exists between a vertex :math:`x\in P_1` and a vertex :math:`y\in P_2` if and only if the conditions:

.. math::

    x_i(1-A_2y)_i=0 \\
    y_j(1-A_1x)_j=0

are satisfied for all indices :math:`i` and :math:`j`. Whenever an edge connects :math:`x` and :math:`y`,
normalising these vectors to form probability distributions produces an extreme Nash equilibrium.
Furthermore, for any clique in the bipartite graph, the pair of convex hulls of the corresponding extreme equilibria
defines a set of Nash equilibria.

.. _enumpoly:

enumpoly
--------

Reads a game on standard input and
computes Nash equilibria by solving systems of polynomial equations
and inequalities.

This program searches for all Nash equilibria in a strategic game
using a support enumeration approach. This approach computes all the
supports which could, in principle, be the support of a Nash
equilibrium.  For each candidate support, it attempts to compute
totally mixed equilibria on that support by successively subdividing
the space of mixed strategy profiles or mixed behavior profiles (as appropriate).
By using the fact that the equilibrium conditions imply a collection
of equations and inequalities which can be expressed as multilinear
polynomials, the subdivision constructed is such that each cell
contains either no equilibria or exactly one equilibrium.

For strategic games, the program searches supports in the order proposed
by Porter, Nudelman, and Shoham [PNS04]_.  For two-player games, this
prioritises supports for which both players have the same number of
strategies.  For games with three or more players, this prioritises
supports which have the fewest strategies in total.  For many classes
of games, this will tend to lower the average time until finding one equilibrium,
as well as finding the second equilibrium (if one exists).

(new) Reads a game on standard input and
computes Nash equilibria by solving systems of polynomial equations
and inequalities.

The algorithm begins by enumerating all supports that could potentially constitute the support
of a Nash equilibrium. It then searches for equilibria within each support :math:`S` as follows.
Consider an equilibrium mixed profile :math:`\sigma` with support :math:`S`.
For all players :math:`i` and for every pair of their pure strategies :math:`(q,r)` in the support :math:`S`,
the following indifference equations hold:

.. math::

    u_i(q,\sigma_{-i}) = u_i(r, \sigma_{-i})

where :math:`u_i(a,\sigma_{-i})`` denotes the payoff obtained by player :math:`i` upon
unilaterally deviating to strategy :math:`a`. These indifference equations can be expressed
as polynomial equations in the strategy probabilities. Additionally, the requirement that
the each player's strategy probabilities sum to one provides another polynomial equation.

The algorithm searches for roots of this polynomial system by successively subdividing the hypercube :math:`[0,1]^D`.
The subdivision is performed such that each cell contains either no solutions or exactly one solution.
For cells containing exactly one solution, Newton's method is applied to compute the solution precisely.
Once solutions for a given support have been obtained, it is straightforward to verify that they
satisfy the conditions of a Nash equilibrium.

For extensive-form games, the procedure is analogous, except that the variables correspond to sequence-form
realization weights rather than pure-strategy probabilities.

For strategic games, the program searches supports in the order proposed
by Porter, Nudelman, and Shoham [PNS04]_.  For two-player games, this
prioritises supports for which both players have the same number of
strategies.  For games with three or more players, this prioritises
supports which have the fewest strategies in total.  For many classes
of games, this will tend to lower the average time until finding one equilibrium,
as well as finding the second equilibrium (if one exists).



.. _lp:

lp
---

Reads a two-player constant-sum game on standard input
and computes a Nash equilibrium by solving a linear program. The
program uses the sequence form formulation of Koller, Megiddo, and von
Stengel [KolMegSte94]_ for extensive games.

While the set of equilibria in a two-player constant-sum strategic
game is convex, this method will only identify one of the extreme
points of that set.

The algorithm constructs a linear program using the sequence-form
constraints and payoff matrices. Specifically, it solves an optimisation
problem of the form:

.. math::

    \operatorname{maximise}~ c^Tx ~~~\operatorname{subject to}~ Ax\leq b,~x\geq 0

where :math:`x` denotes the vector of free variables. The linear program
is solved using the simplex method, and the resulting solution is then
translated into the mixed behavior profile corresponding to a Nash equilibrium.

.. _lcp:

lcp
---

Reads a two-player game on standard input and
computes Nash equilibria by finding solutions to a linear
complementarity problem. For extensive games, the program uses the
sequence form representation of the extensive game, as defined by
Koller, Megiddo, and von Stengel [KolMegSte94]_, and applies the
algorithm developed by Lemke.

For strategic games, the program uses the method of Lemke and Howson
[LemHow64]_. In this case, the method will find all "accessible"
equilibria, i.e., those that can be found as concatenations of Lemke-Howson
paths that start at the artificial equilibrium.
There exist strategic-form games for which some equilibria cannot be found
by this method, i.e., some equilibria are inaccessible; see Shapley [Sha74]_.

In a two-player strategic game, the set of Nash equilibria can be expressed
as the union of convex sets. This program will find extreme points
of those convex sets.  See :ref:`enummixed` for a method
which is guaranteed to find all the extreme points for a strategic
game.

(new)

Reads a two-player game on standard input and
computes Nash equilibria by finding solutions to a linear
complementarity problem.

For extensive games the algorithm constructs a linear complementarity program (LCP) using the sequence-form
constraints and payoff matrices as defined by Koller, Megiddo, and von Stengel [KolMegSte94]_.
Specifically, it seeks solutions to a system of inequalities of the form:

.. math::

    w = Mz+q \\
    w\geq 0 \\
    z\geq 0 \\
    z^Tw = 0

where :math:`w` and :math:`z` denote the vectors of free variables.

To solve the LCP, the method of Lemke is used, where an artificial variable :math:`z_0` is introduced, so that:

.. math::

    w = Mz + q + z_01

This creates a trivial solution where :math:`z_i=0` for all :math:`i\neq 0`
and :math:`w_j=0` for some :math:`j`.
A sequence of
solutions is then generated via successive pivot operations until $z_0=0$, at which point a solution
to the original LCP is obtained. This solution is subsequently translated into the mixed behavior profile
corresponding to a Nash equilibrium.

For strategic games, the program uses the method of Lemke and Howson
[LemHow64]_. In this case, the method will find all "accessible"
equilibria, i.e., those that can be found as concatenations of Lemke-Howson
paths that start at the artificial equilibrium.
There exist strategic-form games for which some equilibria cannot be found
by this method, i.e., some equilibria are inaccessible; see Shapley [Sha74]_.

In a two-player strategic game, the set of Nash equilibria can be expressed
as the union of convex sets. This program will find extreme points
of those convex sets.  See :ref:`enummixed` for a method
which is guaranteed to find all the extreme points for a strategic
game.


.. _liap:

liap
----

Reads a game on standard input and computes
approximate Nash equilibria using a function minimization approach.

This procedure searches for equilibria by generating random starting
points and using conjugate gradient descent to minimize the Lyapunov
function of the game. This is a nonnegative function which is
zero exactly at strategy profiles which are Nash equilibria.

Note that this procedure is not globally convergent. That is, it is
not guaranteed to find all, or even any, Nash equilibria.

(new)

Reads a game on standard input and computes
approximate Nash equilibria using a function minimization approach.

Given a real number :math:`\sigma_a` associated with each action :math:`a` in an extensive form game,
we define the following terms.

(i) Penalisation for negative probabilities:

.. math::

    \sum_{a\in\mathcal{A}}(\min\{\sigma_a, 0\})^2

(ii) Penalisation for not summing to one at infosets:

.. math::

    \sum_{I \in \mathcal{I}}\left(\sum_{a\in\mathcal{A}(I)}\sigma_a-1\right)^2

where :math:`\mathcal{I}` is the set of information sets and :math:`\mathcal{A}(I)` is the set of actions
at information set :math:`I`.

(iii) Residual term:

.. math::

    \sum_{I \in \mathcal{I}}\sum_{a\in\mathcal{A}(I)}(\max\{u(a)-u(I),0\})^2

where :math:`u(a)` and :math:`u(I)` denote the values (dependent on :math:`\sigma`) of action :math:`a` and
information set :math:`I` respectively.

The Lyapunov function is defined as a weighted sum of these three terms.
It is non-negative and equals zero if and only if :math:`\sigma` represents
an agent Nash equilibrium mixed behavior profile.
The algorithm searches for equilibria by generating random starting points and
applying conjugate gradient descent to minimise the Lyapunov function.

Note that this procedure is not globally convergent; that is, it is not guaranteed to find all,
or even any, Nash equilibria.

.. _logit:

logit
-----

Reads a game on standard input and computes the
principal branch of the (logit) quantal response correspondence.

The method is based on the procedure described in Turocy [Tur05]_ for
strategic games and Turocy [Tur10]_ for extensive games.
It uses standard path-following methods (as
described in Allgower and Georg's "Numerical Continuation Methods") to
adaptively trace the principal branch of the correspondence
efficiently and securely.

The method used is a predictor-corrector method, which first generates
a prediction using the differential equations describing the branch of
the correspondence, followed by a corrector step which refines the
prediction using Newton's method for finding a zero of a function. Two
parameters control the operation of this tracing.

In extensive games, logit quantal response equilibria are not well-defined
if an information set is not reached due to being the successor of chance
moves with zero probability.  In such games, the implementation treats
the beliefs at such information sets as being uniform across all member nodes.

(new)

Reads a game on standard input and computes the
principal branch of the (logit) quantal response correspondence.

The method is based on the procedure described in Turocy [Tur05]_ for
strategic games and Turocy [Tur10]_ for extensive games.
It uses standard path-following methods (as
described in Allgower and Georg's "Numerical Continuation Methods") to
adaptively trace the principal branch of the correspondence
efficiently and securely.

For an extensive form game, an agent quantal response equilibrium with parameter :math:`\lambda`
is defined by, at each information set :math:`I`, the equations:

.. math::

    \sigma(a) \propto \exp(\lambda u_i(a))

for all actions :math:`a\in I`, where :math:`\sigma(a)` and :math:`u_i(a)` denote the
probability and value of action :math:`a` respectively. This leads to the following
system of equations over all infosets :math:`I` and actions :math:`a`:

.. math::

    \sum_{b \in I}\sigma(b) = 1 \\
    \log \sigma(a) - \log \sigma(a_0) = \lambda(u_i(a) - u(a_0))

where :math:`a_0` is a fixed reference action in the information set containing :math:`a`.

These equations define a 1-dimensional manifold in the space of variables :math:`(\lambda, \log(\sigma))`.
The algorithm starts on this manifold at :math:`\lambda = 0`, where the solution corresponds to the
uniform distribution over actions at each information set. It then moves along the curve using a
predictor-corrector method. Specifically, on each iteration the predictor step moves along the
tangent of the curve, and then the corrector step uses Newton's method to project back onto the curve
in the direction orthogonal to that tangent. Two parameters control the operation of this tracing.
The algorithm terminates when the maximum regret is below the desired threshold.

In extensive games, logit quantal response equilibria are not well-defined
if an information set is not reached due to being the successor of chance
moves with zero probability.  In such games, the implementation treats
the beliefs at such information sets as being uniform across all member nodes.


.. _simpdiv:

simpdiv
--------

Reads a game on standard input and computes
approximations to Nash equilibria using a simplicial subdivision
approach.

This program implements the algorithm of van der Laan, Talman, and van
Der Heyden [VTH87]_. The algorithm proceeds by constructing a triangulated grid
over the space of mixed strategy profiles, and uses a path-following
method to compute an approximate fixed point. This approximate fixed
point can then be used as a starting point on a refinement of the
grid. The program continues this process with finer and finer grids
until locating a mixed strategy profile at which the maximum regret is
small.

(new)

Reads a game on standard input and computes
approximations to Nash equilibria using a simplicial subdivision
approach.

This program implements the algorithm of van der Laan, Talman, and van
Der Heyden [VTH87]_. At each iteration, the algorithm triangulates the space of mixed strategy
profiles into a simplicial complex. Each vertex in the triangulation is labelled with the
player exhibiting the maximum regret and the strategy responsible for it. Each iteration seeks
to find a completely labelled simplex, where each strategy is either present in the labels
of its vertices, or has probability :math:`0` on the simplex (due to the simplex being on
the boundary). It finds this by following a path of simplicies, starting from a
:math:`0`-dimensional simplex (i.e. a single vertex), and guided by the labels of their vertices.
On this path simplicies can increase or decrease in dimension (i.e. a vertex enters or exits) or can
pivot, where a vertex that shares its label with another is chosen and the simplex is flipped
along the facet opposite the vertex (so that the vertex exits and another enters). When
a completely labelled simplex is reached it seeds the starting point of the next iteration,
which operates on a finer triangulation of the space.

.. _ipa:

ipa
---

Reads a game on standard input and computes Nash
equilibria using an iterated polymatrix approximation approach
developed by Govindan and Wilson [GovWil04]_.
This program is based on the
`Gametracer 0.2 <http://dags.stanford.edu/Games/gametracer.html>`_
implementation by Ben Blum and Christian Shelton.

The algorithm takes as a parameter a mixed strategy profile.  This profile is
interpreted as defining a ray in the space of games.  The profile must have
the property that, for each player, the most frequently played strategy must
be unique.

The algorithm utilises the concept of a polymatrix game, which is a game in
which the payoffs take the form:

.. math::

    u_i(\sigma) = \sum_{j\neq i} u_i^j(\sigma_i, \sigma_i)

where :math:`u_i(\sigma)` denotes the payoff to player :math:`i` from the mixed
strategy profile :math:`\sigma`, which consists of a mixed strategy :math:`\sigma_k`
for each player :math:`k`.

At each iteration, the algorithm begins with a mixed strategy profile. It then
approximates the game as a polymatrix game around this profile and computes an
equilibrium of the polymatrix game using the Lemke–Howson method. It then takes
a step towards this solution, creating the starting mixed strategy profile for
the next iteration.

.. _gnm:

gnm
---

Reads a game on standard input and computes Nash
equilibria using a global Newton method approach developed by Govindan
and Wilson [GovWil03]_. This program is based on the
`Gametracer 0.2 <http://dags.stanford.edu/Games/gametracer.html>`_
implementation by Ben Blum and Christian Shelton.

The algorithm takes as a parameter a mixed strategy profile.  This profile is
interpreted as defining a ray in the space of games. Specifically, it generates
a set of games:

.. math::

    \{ U_{\lambda} := U + \lambda\eta\,|\, \lambda\in\mathbb{R}\}

where :math:`U` is the payoff tensor of the original game and :math:`\eta` is
constructed from the profile. The profile must have
the property that, for each player, the most frequently played strategy must
be unique.

Given some a game :math:`U_{\lambda}` in a ray, we have the following
equations for an equilibrium mixed strategy profile :math:`\sigma` and
payoff vector :math:`v`:

.. math::

    \sigma_{i,s}(u_{\lambda, i}(s,\sigma_{-i})-v_i) = 0 \\
    \sum_{s}\sigma_{i,s} = 1

where :math:`u_{\lambda, i}(s,\sigma_{-i})` is the payoff that player
:math:`i` would obtain by unilaterally deviating to pure strategy :math:`s`.
Note that these equations, for all values of :math:`\lambda`, define a one
dimensional manifold. The algorithm starts at a high value of :math:`\lambda`
where the solution is trivial. At each iteration it moves along the tangent
to the curve and then modifies :math:`\eta` (hence modifying the curve)
such that this point lies on the new curve. Occasionally, Newton's method is
used on an iteration to correct numerical errors. Once we reach a point with
:math:`\lambda=0` we have an equilibrium of the true game.